Tuesday's storm soaked the Washington region with record rainfall, toppled trees onto buildings, knocked out power, and flooded areas near rivers and streams.

At least one person had to be rescued from the deluge, authorities said. Several school systems closed early or canceled activities because of the dual threat of heavy rain and damaging winds, which gusted to near 50 mph around D.C. but largely fell short of the criteria of a high-wind warning issued by the National Weather Service.

The 2.24 inches at Reagan National Airport, 1.76 inches at Washington Dulles International Airport and 2.62 inches at Baltimore-Washington International Marshall Airport were all record amounts for the date. That brings Washington's total rainfall to 9.69 inches since Dec.1, well past the previous high of 7.56 inches during the same period in 1901-1902, according to Capital Weather Gang's Ian Livingston.

Strong and steady winds from the southeast pushed water up and over the banks of the Chesapeake Bay and Potomac River, raising water levels to record territory. Pictures and videos posted on social media showed flooding in Old Town Alexandria, Annapolis and at Baltimore's Inner Harbor.

The Prince George's County Fire Department said on X that a man was pulled from rising waters by a bystander in the 10900 block of Baltimore Avenue in Beltsville around 9:35p.m. The man was transported to a hospital in critical condition, the department said.

Though no fatalities were reported, the impact on area travel was dramatic, with Rock Creek threatening to flood low-lying areas along Beach Drive. Parts of Metro were flooded, including track between the King Street and Van Dorn stations. Cars pushed their way through rising waters at the intersection of University Boulevard and New Hampshire Avenue in Langley Park.

The wet winter has saturated soils, increasing the risk of flooding and downed trees with more storms on the horizon late this week and early next week.

In the storm's aftermath, Wednesday was forecast to be dry, but gusty winds lingered as well as a continued coastal flood threat.

Rainfall totals
Rainfall totals were generally in the range of 1.5 to 3 inches, with localized higher amounts. Some of the highest rain totals in the area included:

Bethesda: 3.93 inches

Haymarket, Va.: 3.33 inches

Ellicott City: 3.30 inches

Leesburg: 3.23 inches

Dale City, Va.: 3.20 inches

Great Falls, Va.: 3.17 inches

Gaithersburg: 3.13 inches

Pasadena, Md.: 3.12 inches

Bowie: 2.90 inches

Springfield: 2.79 inches

Falls Church: 2.72 inches

Laurel: 2.71 inches

Annapolis: 2.65 inches

Silver Spring: 2.63 inches

Alexandria: 2.59 inches

Mount Airy, Md.: 2.44 inches

La Plata, Md.: 2.51 inches

The rain caused numerous streams to overflow, prompting flood warnings and several road closures.

Coastal flooding
Coastal flood warnings and advisories remained in effect until Wednesday evening because of the threat of tidal flooding along shorelines of the District, Arlington County, the city of Alexandria and Anne Arundel County, including Annapolis.

In Annapolis, the Severn River recorded its third-highest crest on record when it reached 5.1 feet early Wednesday morning, which is 2.5 feet above flood stage. The Patapsco River in Baltimore recorded its fifth-highest crest, and the Potomac River in Alexandria recorded its seventh-highest crest. Havre de Grace, Md., along the Chesapeake Bay, reached its highest crest ever, but record-keeping there only goes back to 2012, while data for the other locations goes back to the 1900s.

Wind gusts
Peak gusts were generally about 50 mph within a one-county radius of D.C. Stronger gusts near 60 mph occurred closer to the Chesapeake Bay, where the Bay Bridge was closed for a time.

A number of trees were reported down, including on Beach Drive and Rock Creek Parkway in Northwest Washington, on Independence Avenue in SouthwestWashington, on the Beltway near Georgia Avenue in Silver Spring, on the Baltimore-Washington Parkway in both Laurel and Greenbelt, and on Good Hope Road in Colesville, Md. A tree fell and struck an unoccupied vehicle in Somerset, Md.

Trees also fell on an apartment building in Hyattsville, on homes in Marlton and Kettering, Md., and on power lines in Chantilly, Va.

The National Weather Service upgraded most of the D.C. region early Tuesday afternoon from a wind advisory, which called for gusts as high as 50 to 55 mph, to a high-wind warning out of concern for damaging gusts up to 60 mph. Initially, the high-wind warning had been issued only for areas closer to the Chesapeake Bay.

Winds were roaring from the south near 100 mph at an altitude of about 2,500 feet late Tuesday afternoon - near-record speeds for the time of year - as predicted by forecast models. But models can struggle to accurately predict how much of those winds will be brought down to the surface by vertical motions in the atmosphere.

"Weather prediction models in general significantly overestimated the peak surface wind gusts in yesterday's storm, close to the D.C. metro region," said Jeff Halverson, Capital Weather Gang's severe weather expert. "Many meteorologists recognized this and knew the numbers needed to be scaled back. The trick was knowing by how much. Some of this depended on knowing the exact storm track. It turned out we did not get deep into a more unstable air mass, which would have allowed the momentum to mix more readily to the ground."

These were some of the highest gusts recorded in the region:

Bishops Head, Md.: 63 mph

Crisfield, Md.: 61 mph

Bay Ridge, Md.: 60 mph

Highland Beach, Md.: 60 mph

Point Lookout, Md.: 60 mph

Tolly Point, Md.: 58 mph

Patuxent River, Md.: 55 mph

Francis Scott Key Bridge, Md.: 53 mph

Reagan National Airport: 52 mph

Sandy Point, Md.: 52 mph

George Washington University: 51 mph

Solomons Island, Md.: 51 mph

Dulles Airport: 49 mph

Annapolis: 49 mph

BWI Airport: 47 mph

Jason Samenow and Justin Wm. Moyer contributed to this report.

Word count: 970
Copyright WP Company LLC d/b/a The Washington Post Jan 11, 2024
